This video is brought to you by brilliant.
Get a free trial with brilliant and take advantage of its hands on stem,
learning lessons, more on them in a bit.
In the modern age,
it's given that anyone in the white house will at least briefly get dubbed worse
president ever. Harry Truman,
Ronald Reagan for of both spent part of their administrations with approval
ratings under water.
Heck some of you are probably already hitting the comments to dump on Trump or
declare let's go Brandon.
But what happens when the assessment is true?
What happens when the historical consensus broadly agrees that someone really
was the worst? Well,
look at no further than James Buchanan elected in 80 E 56,
Buchana became the 15th president just as the nation was falling apart.
Pro and anti-slavery settlers were massacring one another in Kansas.
John Brown was trying to spark an insurrection and a member of Congress had
nearly murdered another on the Senate floor. Yet,
while this would've tested any president Buchana failed that test spectacularly
in an age of,
he tentatively tried to find a compromise only to watch as both his reputation
and his country plunged into the Abys.
Was he a truly bad leader or just unlucky? Well,
today we are telling the story of the man who history has declared
America's worst ever leader.
So far this century,
there have been 14 major surveys of historians and academics that attempted to
rank us presidents from best to worst in or, but four of them,
James Yana finished last on the rare occasions when he didn't,
he placed second from the bottom with such a stinker of a historical reputation.
It could be tempting to think that there must have been something P preordained
about Buchanan's failure.
That it must have been clear how useless he was from the day he was born.
But perhaps that's the most interesting thing about the life of James Buchanan.
If you only focus on it prior to 1856,
you might think that it'd make a pretty good leader born on April the 23rd,
1791 in rural Pennsylvania.
The future 15th presidents came from decent hard working stock.
His father had immigrated to the us from Ireland just eight years earlier and
had already established a successful business.
The boy's mother too was smart and motivated from a young age.
She instilled in Buchanan and his 10 siblings,
a love of breed combined with the best education his father could buy.
These values meant Buchanan graduated,
prepared for a life among his elite. He settled in Lancaster,
studied law past the bar. And by 1812 had opened his own practice,
but his legal career would be put on holes because 1812 was also the year that
north America exploded. The war of 18.
12 is one of those awkward conflicts where a whole bunch of people died,
but nobody really won pitting the Americans and then native allies against the
British their indigenous associates it's saw.
Most of the Northern states threatens in places like Pennsylvania,
milit were activated, enable bodied.
Men were called up among them was James Buchanan.
Although mobilized Buchanan's unit wouldn't see action,
but the big stir around the war itself helped crystallize the young man's
politics. Unlike most of his contemporaries,
he found himself drawn to the anti-war Federalists.
Once America's premier political party,
the Federalists had controlled the government from 1789 to 80 0 1.
By the time the DM Buchanan joins their ranks though the party was in its death
rows,
unable to beat democratic Republicans and hemorrhaging support for its anti-war
views. Still something about their basic conservatism appealed to Buchanan from
1814 to 1819,
he sat as a Federalist in the Pennsylvania house of representatives honing his
political skills. At the same time,
his growing law career helped boost his speaking talent as well as netting him
Ackles of money. By the time he left the state house,
then Buchanan was a growing political force,
a man with a bright and shiny future ahead of him.
Now he just needed someone to share that future with on paper and Carolyn Corman
was the perfect match for the up and coming lawyer,
the daughter of a rich merchants and part of Pennsylvania high society.
She was just the sort of potential wife,
an ambitious young man needed by his sight. Sadly,
that sort of box sticking may have been all Buchanan ever saw in her.
There are two versions of what happens after their engagement.
One version has it that Coleman's parents suspecting Buchanan was after their
money refused to allow the marriage.
The other is that Coleman discovered her fiance was secretly seeing other women,
whatever tale is true,
the outcome was the same Coleman broke off the engagement. And a few days later,
she was dead amid rumors of suicide.
The death of his fiance broke Buchanan forbidden by her family from attending
the funeral. He instead lost himself in politics.
Much later he would claim he began as a national career as a distraction from my
great grief.
It was a decision that would have repercussions for the entire nation.
Although it was as a Federalist that Buchanan won his first seating Congress.
It was clear by then that the party was over in the 1820 election.
They hadn't even been able to find a candidate unless Buchanan wanted to fade
wisdom.
He needed to jump ship like now luckily a new movement was about to throw
Washington's disaffected Politico, a lifeline in 1823,
the state of Tennessee sent the hugely popular war hero.
Andrew Jackson to the Senate,
although nominally a democratic Republican Jackson was really a force unto
himself. No sooner had he hit DC than he began weaving through like a hurricane
scattering old certainties in his past,
among those swept up by his populous movement was James Buchanan like fellow
future president James KPO Buchanan seemed to sense the future in Jackson.
He became old Hary staunchest champion in Pennsylvania.
When four candidates separately ran under the democratic Republican banner in
1824, it was Jackson that he threw his support behind, but 1824,
wouldn't be Jackson's breakthrough year.
Although he netted a plurality of the vote tary didn't went outright.
This allowed the election to be decided in the house where enough delegates
lined up to hand John Quincy Adams,
the presidency to say Andrew Jackson was livid.
It's a bit like saying con McGregor has a bit of an anger management problem.
Jackson cried the corrupt bargain that made Adams president.
He also cried the Buchanan who he felt had failed to back him since Jackson was
an epic grudge,
should this light would help keep Buchana out of serious politics for years
is still Buchanan was by now deeply invested in Jackson's movement.
When Ary reforms, the democratic party Buchanan was still there in Pennsylvania.
Campaigning hard for it.
When Jackson won the presidency in both 1828 and 1832 Buchanan was among
those cheering, the loudest,
eventually his loyalty cooled all Aries temper enough to forgive 1832
Jackson made Buchanan Envoy to Russia. When the lawyer returns,
it was to sit in the senates, a Democrat.
And so he began an 11 year stretch in Congress with Buchanan quietly.
Amasing more power.
It was also the beginning of perhaps the most important relationship in his
life. If you've Googled James Buchana,
you may have come across the claim that he was America's first gay presidents.
This is entirely thanks to his incredibly close relationship with Senator
William Rufus Deva king of Alabama on arriving in Washington, Buchanan and king,
both moved into the same boarding house of bachelors,
originally home to several unmarried congressmen.
It eventually emptied out until only the two remained living like a couple.
This isn't just our modern take.
Deborah's referred to the them as Mr. Buchanan and his wife or aunt Nancy and
aunt fancy. Certainly they made a striking pair,
the reserved fer Colonel king and the outgoing ruckus Buchanan rarely
apart. They clearly enjoyed one another's company immensely,
but while it's tempting to claim Buchanan as an early L G B T pioneer,
the truth is that we simply don't have enough air evidence to say if he and king
were lovers or just really good pals,
certainly there are illusions such as a letter Buchanan send king while he was
away writing.
I am now solitary and alone having no companion in the house with me.
I have gone Aw, wing to several gentlemen,
but have not succeeded with one of them still illusions aren't definitive proof.
And it's all almost beside the point,
whether they were sexual partners or not king had a profound impact on
Buchanan's life. A powerful supporter of states' rights, slavery,
and the supremacy of the white man king was nonetheless notable for being just
as strongly against thees.
This put him at odds with many other southerners and to Beana seemed to point to
an optimistic truth that finding common grounds between free and slave states
was as possible as it was desirable. Sadly for Buchanan,
he'd lived to see just how hollow that truth turned out to be.
And just before we get into the rest of today's video,
I want to tell you about today's fantastic sponsor. Brilliant,
brilliant is a problem solving based website and app with our hands on approach.
Now you've heard meet,
talk about brilliant before they teach you all about math,
science and computer science.
Whether you are a student looking to get ahead or a professional keen on
building some skills, you should absolutely check out brilliant.
Maybe you've always wanted to learn about neural networks,
essentially how computers could program themselves. Well, brilliant.
Have a course on that. And it teaches you through easy to access puzzles,
and it does it in plain English.
There's no reading a paragraph a dozen times trying to figure out what it's all
about. Now. That's just one example.
There's loads of great stuff on their platform, including daily challenges,
which are a great way to flex your gray matter every day.
Brilliant is a great compliment to watching educational videos along this one.
And it will really help you master even complex technical subjects.
So if you wanna support biographics and get unlimited access to brilliance,
indepth, math, and science courses,
you can head on over to brilliant org slash biographics to get 20% off that
annual premium subscription. And let's go back to today's video
By the time 1844 Dawn's Buchanan was an experienced Senator with a significant
power base in the democratic party,
just as the Democrats were getting ready to regain the white house after two
terms of Jackson and one of his success,
Martin van Buren Buchanan's party had lost power to wig it
William Henry Harrison,
but then Harrison had gone and died into his replacement. John Tyler.
So alienated everyone that the white house was back in play.
If the cannon CIN party's nomination, he might well become presidents.
Unfortunately, that was a big if with the crowded field,
the convention deadlocked in need of a compromised candidate,
James K PO's name was pushed forward.
His chance had been blown Buchanan through his delegates behind Polk Polk became
the democratic nominee. And as Buchanan had divined,
he went on to win the white house.
Still PO's Ascension wasn't all bad for Buchanan grateful for his support and
needing to keep Pennsylvania on side for a coming political battle.
Over tariffs Polk made Buchanan his secretary of state.
This dropped old buck right into the middle of the two biggest issues of the
day, Oregon and Texas,
a believer in America's manifest destiny to stretch from sea to shining sea.
Paul could come to power promising to annex the Republic of Texas and kick the
British out of the jointly controlled Oregon territory.
It was demanding prospect for any secretary of state and the wave you can and
dealt with it. Hints at all. His few failings as Polk recorded in his diary,
his new minister was incapable of taking a position which might make his
supporters unhappy. For example, PO's campaign slogan of 45,
40 or fight had implied war with Britain. If it didn't surrender Oregon,
all the way up to the Alaskan border in private Buchanan council,
avoiding conflict and advocated to compromise that eventually became the modern
Canadian us border. But when the compromise bill came to a Senate vote,
Buchanan suddenly transformed into an ardent expansionist excoriating Polk for
not throwing the British out on their tea, drinking asses,
same deal with the Mexican American war triggered by somewhat roundabout route
by the us annexation of Texas.
The war saw America sees huge swath its Southern neighbor Buchanan initially
urged Polk to announce that us would return the conquer territory at the war's
ends that any seizures would only be temporary.
But then the us marched on Mexico's capital and Buchanan suddenly joined
democratic cheerleaders, demanding poll due to Mexico.
What a hungry Yorkshireman does to a pork pipe as far as Polk was concerned.
All of this flip flopping was a sign that his secretary of state was a slim ETO,
more interested in building support for a future presidential bid than helping
to run the country. But a more charitable reading is possible.
All his life Yana was a man who liked to be liked whether it was in the Senate
or as a northerner dealing with southerners or as a bridge between the free and
slave states.
Buchanan's default instinct was to keep everyone happy in better times,
this kind of reflexive centrism could have been his making.
Instead it wounds up being his undoing in 1848,
James Polk stepped down after a single term.
The democratic nomination open Buchanan threw his heart into the ring.
Only for the delegates to figuratively. Take a dump in his,
he placed third on the ballot.
His shenanigans clearly having failed to win him many friends,
not that it mattered. 1848 saw Mexican American war heroes.
Zachary Taylor stand for the wigs netting, the party,
a solid win in the aftermath.
Buchana went back to Pennsylvania to plot his return.
His goal was to come back in 1852 and finally NAB the presidency.
Instead fate would force him to wait until the white house had gone from being a
prize to a cha lace with the bitterest cide
For a guy who liked to be liked.
James Buchana tried a knack for making enemy east, take Stephen A. Douglas,
a Senator from Illinois with a tiny body under hedge. So oversized,
it turned in the nickname.
The little giant Douglas stood against Buchanan at the 1852 democratic
convention,
but their fight for the nomination was so bitter that it dynamited both of their
chances with neither backing down the conventioned for a compromised candidate,
declaring little known Franklin,
the winner still Pierce's nomination and eventual win needn't have been bad for
the Buchanan.
His old buddy Colonel king was Pierce's VP pick and selected alongside him.
But while Buchana doubtlessly celebrated his friend's triumph,
it was a short lived party on April the 18th, 1853,
William Mark King died following a long illness.
When he got the news older buck was devastated. What could he do?
He'd accepted a posting to England from Pierce.
All Buchanan could do now was board the boat and try to hide his deep
overwhelming grief while things clearly sucked on a personal level though,
on a professional level, the timing couldn't have been better.
His new post meant Buchanan was far enough away to survive the oncoming
political storm.
So remember all that territory that the USCS from Mexico while those territories
now wanted to be admitted as states trouble was Congress was sensitively
balanced between free en slaved states and both sides were super jumpy about the
newcomers, making them a permanent minority.
This had initially led to the compromise of 1850,
which among other things cemented the idea of popular sovereignty,
deciding if a new state was free or slave,
but this only made the Kansas Nebraska act so much worse in 1854 Buchanan's
nemesis. Stephen Douglas tried to pass a bill,
organizing the territory of Nebraska into two separate territories,
Nebraska and Kansas Douglas did this to keep pushing the us west,
but because he was unable to pass his bill without Southern support,
he threw in a clause about these new territories,
deciding the slavery issue by popular vote.
This took a gigantic dump all over the long standing Missouri compromise,
which had outlawed slavery north of the 36 30 parallel.
So when the bill passed it set off a crazed rush,
sensing an opportunity to tip the Kansas vote.
New settlers from both slave states,
Missouri and the free north poured into the territory.
Predictably all hell broke loose in sustained vigilante violence known as
bleeding,
Kansas dozens were killed and simmering intentions were sent skyrocketing across
the nation.
It also annihilated the reputations of the Kansas Nebraska acts back as Stephen
Douglas and Franklin Pierce suddenly the 1856 democratic nomination was back in
play, but by then Buchanan was having his own PR problems. In 1853,
Buchanan had met America's ministers to Spain and France in Austin Belgium to
discuss Spain's refusal to sell Cuba paranoid.
A slave vol on the islands might prompt a similar uprising in the south B and
helped prepare a cable urging Pierce to annex Cuba. Unfortunately,
the cable was made public and abolitionists and free soils. [inaudible] brick,
thanks to his conviction that the us constitution upheld the rights of slave
states.
Buchanan was already seen as a dough face northerner with Southern sympathies.
Now the OST manifesto also made him look like an imperialist,
trying to spread the south peculiar institution.
The result was to make Buchanan extremely unpalatable to Northern voters,
but the opposite was also true within the democratic party.
The Southern wing began to see Buchanan as more than just an ally.
It began to see him as a southerner in orbit name.
This meant that when Buchanan tried for the nomination again,
he was going to have to rely on the slave states to win.
But this new allegiance would come at a terrible cost, not only for old bark,
but for all America.
When James Buchana emerged triumph ands at the 1856 democratic convention,
the news has greeted less with a cheer and more with a,
although a serious player Buchana hasn't won because anyone thought it'd be a
great nominee, but because he was the only person,
both southerners and northerners might back by now,
it was clear that the nation was splitting at the seams.
The months before the convention of pro slavery,
Mord sacked the free town of Lawrence in Kansas, in retaliation abolitionist,
John Brown, randomly murdered five pro slavery settlers.
The violins had even spread to the capital on may the 22nd Preston Brooks had
viciously beaten Senator Charles Sumner,
half to death in the chamber for an anti-slavery speech. Things were so tense.
Buchanan. Wasn't sure about accepting the nomination writing.
I had hoped for the nomination in 1844,
again in 1848 and in 1852,
but now I would hesitate to take it before many years,
the abolitionists will bring war upon this land.
It may come during the next presidential term yet for all the precedent of that
statement. The fact was Buchanan had now spent over a decade,
conniving and scheming to get the top job and 1856 promised
and easy race. The week party had collapsed.
The Republicans were still widely seen as too radical to win.
If ever an election would be a cake walk. It was 1856.
So despite his reservations, Buchanan went for it on November the fourth,
the Democrats handedly on the white house,
Buch was on track to become the 15th president.
See that saying be careful what you wish for Wellby cannons wish was about to
sour quicker than one. Granted by a possessed monkey sport. Back in February,
the Supreme court begun to hear the case of dread Scott,
a slave who accompanied his master to a free state and tried to Sue for his
freedom. Since the case could have massive implications.
The entire nation was nervously waiting on the verdict,
including the president's elect in early 1857,
Buchanan broke with ethical practice to write to some of the justices,
pressuring them for advanced news of the outcome.
He may have even prodded one in his preferred direction, either way.
He got the answer he wanted on March the fourth, 1857,
a confident James Buchanan told his inauguration crowd that the slavery issue
was about to be settled and everyone should abide by the ruling. Two days later,
the Supreme court issued its decision and without Buchanan's dreams of a unified
nation collapsed the court. Didn't just rule that slaves had no rights,
but also that the Missouri compromise had been unconstitutional.
So they struck it down. Meaning slavery could now spread north unchecked.
It was perhaps the most explosive ruling in us history.
If desegregation was a bomb going off,
then dread Scott was a political crack of to if Rowan Wade is a lining rod,
this was a nuclear weapon.
The ruling effectively shreded what few bonds remains between north and south.
While Buchanan tried to dilute the backlash by appointing a cabinet moderates,
the damage was done. Buchanan's honeymoon period.
If it ever existed was over from now on, everything was gonna be downhill
Seen today. James Buchanan single time is like watching a clown car filled with
nitroglycerin slowly, roll toward an orphanage, somehow pathetic,
fascinating and tragic all at the same time, things kicked off right away,
a Compton constitution back in 1855 vote rigging an intimidation had led to the
Kansas territory, electing a pro slavery legislature,
which had then written a constitution that could be boiled down to well slavery.
Yeah, thanks to that whole vote rigging thing.
Most congressmen worth a rejecting this constitution,
even Buchanan's advisors told him it was a non-starter, but for whatever reason,
Buchanan decided this was the hill. He was gonna die on the president,
pressed hard for the Le Compton constitution,
despite it being Anas to his party's Northern wing.
When that wing offered a compromise,
whereby the pro slavery constitution would be passed,
but open to amendment by a popular majority at any time, the Buchanan refused.
The result was Northern Democrats under Buchanan, old enemy, Stephen Douglas,
joining with the Republicans to kill the Kansas constitution.
Buchanan had off northerners and divided his party,
onlys getting nothing in return.
It was a pattern that would continue for four whole years.
Now we don't wanna give the impression that Buchanan's lack of leadership was
the only thing causing America to crumble.
There were plenty of factors beyond his control, such as the panic of 1857,
that wall up the economy or John Brown's 1859 raid on Harper's ferry in
an attempt to spark a slave uprising.
Yet we also shouldn't underestimate the role Buchanan himself played in the
March to war, despite favoring bridge, building Buchanan,
reflexively sided with the slave states and almost all issues declaring of the
south as sovereign stage.
They and they alone are responsible before gardens the world for slavery
existing among them for this,
the people of the north are not more responsible and have no more right to
interfere than with similar institutions and Russia or in Brazil.
But while I wasn't true,
the fugitive slave act since the end of the Missouri compromise slavery was very
much a live issue for the north. More than that, it was a crusade,
one confronting an evil.
So imoral abolitionists felt they had to use every tool to fight its expansion.
By the time 1860 arrived,
then Butte Cannon's administration was weak and the federal government was
paralyzed. Luckily Bana had promised to step down after one turn less.
Luckily he wasn't going to let his party choose a unifying success at,
at the night of the 1860 democratic convention.
Buchanan's allies lobbied hard to deny Stephen Douglas, the nomination,
as a result,
the party split into two camps representing the north and the south.
This meant that on election day,
the more unified Republicans could NAB the white house taking less than
40% of the popular vote in the aftermath of Abraham Lincoln's win.
Buchanan seems to have finally woken up to the danger of succession on December
the sixth,
the called for a new constitutional convention to find a new way forward for
America. But by then,
it was far too late to show any leadership rather than live under a Republican
president.
South Carolina announced its session from the union on December the 20th,
within six weeks, six more states had followed yet.
Even now at the height of the crisis, Buchanan failed to act till the very end.
It was unwilling to face down Southern interests instead letting the states
leave and the Confederacy establish itself.
But he also refused to turn over any federal thoughts to the south.
Even sending reinforcement to Sumter in early 1861,
yet the relief ship wound up turning back to avoid sparking a fight by early
March. It was clear to most in Washington,
the Buchana was simply running down the clock,
trying to avoid war just long enough.
So the responsibility would fall on his success app in this, if nothing else,
he succeeded James Buchana left office on March the fourth,
1861 a little over a month later,
you a South Carolina militia bombarded for Sumter and the civil war began in
retirement. Outta Pennsylvania.
Buchanan lived long enough to witness the carnage that followed the hundreds of
thousands dead. The destruction of once great cities.
He also witnessed his reputation fall into an Abys Baals to face his portrait in
the capital. The Senate drafted resolutions, condemning him.
Although Buchanan would try and hit back with a book,
pinning all the blame for the war on the abolitionists.
The narrative was already set and it's never changed since James Buchana died a
virtual harm on the 1st of June, 1868,
by then he was so unpopular that he barely left the house. He went to his grave,
believing history would vindicate him that one day.
Future dudes would look back on his presidency, not as a disaster,
but the work of a good man doing the right thing fast forward over 150 years.
And that still hasn't happened today.
James Buchanan remains perhaps the least loved president in us history known
only for his catastrophic failure to prevent the civil war.
Certainly it's a hard to disagree with that assessment in recent videos,
we've tried to highlight the overlooked good sides of bad presidents like Warren
G Hardings anti-racism or Herbert Hoover's humanitarian work. Yep.
That's been almost impossible with James Buchanan.
Here was a man who didn't do anything great before taking office who didn't have
superhuman integrity or a particularly kind soul,
or even a strong vision for the nation.
And yet he also wasn't entirely that although it ended in miserable failure,
there's perhaps something to be admired in Buchanan's dreams of compromise of
building bridges instead of burning them down.
Had he lived at another time or had he tried to find common grounds on an issue,
less morally repugnance than slavery it's possible.
He may have gone down as an Oak. Hey presidents,
but James Buchanan's tragedy is that he didn't live in another era.
He lived in one when America needed a strong leader,
a president's unafraid to take a moral stand for his failure to do so.
History has remembered him as the one thing.
He couldn't abide a miserable failure. So I hope you found that video.
Interesting. If he did, please do that's thumbs up button below.
Don't forget to subscribe and thank you for watching.